JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
Gwen Ifill is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Republicans stand
back as their presidential
nominee of four
years ago levels a blistering
attack on this
year's GOP front-runner, Donald
Trump.
Also ahead this Thursday:
fighting fire with
fire. Researchers turn to
mosquitoes as a
weapon against Zika.
KARLA TEPEDINO, Oxitec: The
beauty of this
technique is that it can reach
the mosquitoes
where no other technique can
find it. We are
using mosquitoes to fight
themselves.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus, women on
Wall Street
-- the former managing director
of a New York
investment bank on the rampant
sexism she
and others endured.
MAUREEN SHERRY, Author, "Opening
Belle": If
women were walking by in a
skirt, he would
throw himself on the floor,
pretend to look
up their skirt. And they would
-- he would
get the laugh, you know, from
the other guys.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Some of the
biggest names in
Republican politics took on
Donald Trump with
growing fervor today.
In Salt Lake City, Mitt Romney
injected himself
into the middle of the GOP race,
just ahead
of tonight's candidate debate.
MITT ROMNEY (R), Former
Presidential Candidate:
If we Republicans choose Donald
Trump as our
nominee, the prospects for a
safe and prosperous
future are greatly diminished.
JUDY WOODRUFF: With that, the
party's 2012
nominee for president joined the
campaign
to stop Trump from becoming this
year's standard-bearer.
MITT ROMNEY: Dishonesty is
Donald Trump's
hallmark. He claimed that he had
spoken clearly
and boldly against going into
Iraq.
Wrong. He spoke in favor of
invading Iraq.
He said he saw thousands of
Muslims in New
Jersey celebrating 9/11.
Wrong. He saw no such thing. He
imagined it.
He's not of the temperament of
the kind of
stable, thoughtful person we
need as a leader.
His imagination must not be
married to real
power.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Romney
charged, Trump
is a phony and fraud who's
taking advantage
of the people who support him.
MITT ROMNEY: He's playing the
American public
for suckers. He gets a free ride
to the White
House and all we get is a lousy
hat.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Romney started by
saying he
is not joining the race.
Instead, he said
he'd vote for whomever has the
best chance
of beating Trump. It was a stark
departure
from four years ago, when
candidate Romney
welcomed the billionaire's
backing.
MITT ROMNEY: It means a great
deal to me to
have the endorsement of Mr.
Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Within hours
today, Trump answered
at a campaign stop in Maine.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Look, Mitt is a failed
candidate. He failed.
I backed Mitt Romney. I backed
him. You can
see how loyal he is. He was
begging for my
endorsement. I could have said,
Mitt, drop
to your knees. He would have
dropped to his
knees. He was begging.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The candidate
offered a lengthy
personal critique of Romney,
blasting his
losing effort in 2012.
DONALD TRUMP: He's a choke
artist. He's an
absolute -- and I started
hitting him so hard.
In fact, people say, why did you
hit him so
hard? Because we cannot take
another loss.
We can't take another loss. And
Mitt is indeed
a choke artist. He choked, and
he choked like
I have never seen anyone choke.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Other Republican
elders are
weighing in as well. Senator
John McCain,
the party's 2008 nominee, said
in a statement:
"I would also echo the many
concerns about
Mr. Trump's uninformed and
indeed dangerous
statements on national security
issues."
And some 70-plus Republican
experts on foreign
policy issued a press release
pledging to
oppose the front-runner.
But one of Trump's former rivals
and newest
supporters, New Jersey Governor
Chris Christie,
dismissed the criticism. He
noted he's telling
Trump not to bolt the party if
he's denied
the nomination.
GOV. CHRIS CHRISTIE (R), New
Jersey: I have
urged him not to do that,
because I don't
think that's constructive -- a
constructive
way to go about it, and he knows
that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All of this just
hours before
Trump and his remaining rivals,
Ted Cruz,
Marco Rubio and John Kasich,
face off again
in a FOX News debate in Detroit.
Meanwhile, on the Democratic
side, underdog
Bernie Sanders in Lansing,
Michigan, took
new aim today at Hillary Clinton
and her stance
on trade.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
She has supported NAFTA. I
opposed NAFTA.
She supported permanent normal
trade relations
with China. I vigorously opposed
PNTR with
China. She supported permanent
normal trade
relations with Vietnam. I
opposed that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Clinton stayed
off the trail
today, but The Washington Post
reported a
new turn in the FBI
investigation of her handling
of e-mail as secretary of state.
It said Bryan
Pagliano, a former State
Department staffer
who set up her private server,
has been granted
federal immunity for his
cooperation.
Clinton has acknowledged that it
was a mistake
to use a private server, but has
insisted
nothing she received or sent was
classified
at the time.
We will dig further into today's
Republican
fireworks after the news
summary.
In the day's other news, both
Apple and the
FBI picked up allies today in
their legal
fight over encryption. There was
word that
Google, Facebook, and Microsoft
will oppose
efforts to make Apple unlock an
iPhone. It
was used by Syed Farook in the
mass shootings
in San Bernardino, California.
At the same time, relatives of
six of the
victims filed a brief supporting
the FBI's
position.
The state of Florida is ready to
reinstate
the death penalty. State
lawmakers voted today
to replace a law that the U.S.
Supreme Court
struck down in January. The old
law required
a simple majority of jurors to
recommend a
death sentence. The new one says
at least
10 of the 12 jurors must agree.
From the United Nations today,
hopeful words
on Syria. A special envoy
declared that a
cease-fire is mostly holding
after six days.
In Geneva, Staffan de Mistura
said the truce
is fragile, but has -- quote --
"greatly reduced
the violence."
STAFFAN DE MISTURA, Special
United Nations
Envoy for Syria: This is good
news for many
Syrian people. Unfortunately, we
have to admit,
like in every cessation of
hostilities or
cease-fire, and in particular in
this one,
there are still a number of
places where fighting
has continued, including parts
of Hama, Homs,
Latakia, and Damascus.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At the same time,
Amnesty International
charged Russian and Syrian
government forces
are deliberately targeting
hospitals in and
around Aleppo. It said that
amounts to war
crimes.
North Korea has answered a new
round of U.N.
sanctions by firing half-a-dozen
short-range
projectiles into the sea. South
Korea's military
says they were fired today near
the eastern
town of Wonsan and flew less
than 100 miles.
Later, the North announced that
its leader,
Kim Jong-un, has ordered the
military to be
ready to fire nuclear weapons at
any time.
European leaders sounded
increasingly desperate
today to deal with the mounting
migrant crisis
in Greece. Nearly 32,000 people
are stranded,
and largely blocked from moving
deeper into
the continent.
James Mates of Independent
Television News
is there on the ground.
®MDNM / JAMES MATES: Don't come
to Greece,
they have been told. Don't
believe the smugglers.
You won't get any further. But,
still, they
come, 600 more pouring onto the
keys in the
Port of Piraeus this morning.
But for these new arrivals,
things have changed.
No longer are they being waved
through on
their journey north. For many
now, a tent
on the dockside is the end of
the road. The
main ferry terminal has been
home to several
hundred for more than a week
now, many young
children, for whom the
longed-for passage
to Germany may never happen.
This is what happens when you
try and block
a human tide as it flows
northwards. Just
a week or so ago, all of these
people would
have moved on across the
Macedonian border
and towards Northern Europe.
Now, well, they're
struck here.
WOMAN: It's obvious that Greece
cannot do
it alone. It was never a Greek
problem. It
was always a European and a
global problem.
You cannot expect from one
country to share
this big responsibility.
JAMES MATES: Senior E.U.
officials are in
Athens today trying to reassure
the Greeks
they're not alone. But the words
are aimed
at those still thinking of
traveling.
DONALD TUSK, European Council
President: Do
not come to Europe. Do not
believe the smugglers.
Do not risk your lives and your
money. It
is all for nothing.
JAMES MATES: But for those
already here, Greece
may no longer be a transit
country. In Athens'
picturesque squares, many
hundreds now sleep
in the open. They can't move on.
They won't
go back.
But like Zohreg Gasam and her
four sisters
from Afghanistan, they have
found no welcome.
ZOHREG GASAM, Refugee: We are
tonight sleeping
there, and we not have two...
JAMES MATES: Your blankets.
ZOHREG GASAM: Yes, blankets,
yes. The winter
was really cool.
JAMES MATES: There was once a
warm welcome
for refugees when they came off
the boats
here, but that was when they
were able to
move on through. Now the burden
seems to be
falling on Greeks alone. And
patience and
tolerance are becoming harder to
find.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The migrant
crisis will be
the main subject at a European
Union summit
on Monday.
Back in this country, Oregon is
set to become
the first state to eliminate
coal from its
energy supply by law. The state
legislature
gave final approval yesterday to
the move.
It takes full effect by 2030.
Governor Kate
Brown has indicated she will
sign the bill.
Wall Street made some modest
progress today.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 44
points to close near 16944. The
Nasdaq rose
four. And the S&P 500 added
nearly seven.
And President Obama says he will
do something
few presidents have done: stay
in Washington
after he leaves office. He said
today in Milwaukee
that he wants Sasha, his younger
daughter,
to finish high school before the
family moves.
She's now in the ninth grade.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
two leading
Republican voices on Mitt Romney
and the feverish
efforts to stop Donald Trump;
mosquitoes that
fight the virus they spread; the
horrifying
ways ISIS is using child
soldiers; and much
more.
The deep divides among
Republicans were on
full public display today with
Donald Trump
again the center of attention.
We explore the rifts now with
Michael Leavitt,
former Republican governor of
Utah. And Stephen
Moore, he's an economist at
FreedomWorks.
It's a conservative political
group.
And, gentlemen, welcome to both
of you.
Governor Leavitt, to you first.
We know you know Governor Romney
well. This
is almost unprecedented in
American politics,
for the former standard-bearer
to be going
after the current front-runner
like this.
Four years ago, Mitt Romney
praised Donald
Trump. He begged for his
endorsement, according
to Mr. Trump. What changed?
MICHAEL LEAVITT, Former
Secretary of Health
and Human Services: Well, I have
the benefit
of having actually been there,
and I can tell
you that the way Donald Trump
described it
is simply not accurate.
I think Governor Romney
graciously received
his endorsement. But I think it
would be valuable
for me to at least provide a bit
of personal
context here. I think what we
have seen is
a personal statement on Governor
Romney's
part.
I think we have all had a
brother or a sister
or a close friend we care about
who's about
to make a very serious mistake
that will have
bad consequences and we watch it
happening,
and there's a point at which we
just simply
say, I have to say something or
I'm not going
to feel good about myself.
I think Mitt Romney feels that
way about the
country, and this was a
statement of his own
views of how important it is
that this not
be made in the context of an
emotional state
that I think we all understand,
but would
produce bad consequences.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Governor
Leavitt, we saw
Mitt Romney said he wasn't there
to announce
his own candidacy, but he didn't
rule it out
either. Is he waiting to be
called on? We
notice that he didn't endorse
any of the other
candidates in the race.
MICHAEL LEAVITT: He says
privately to me the
same things he says publicly,
and that is
he is not a candidate and
doesn't intend to
be a candidate.
I think this was, as I
suggested, a desire
to express his views at a time
on a matter
that he feels deeply about and
about a country
he cares deeply about and a
party he cares
deeply about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stephen Moore,
what was your
reaction to Governor Romney's
statement?
STEPHEN MOORE, FreedomWorks: Hi,
Judy.
Well, first, let me say I don't
have a horse
in this race. I like Mitt
Romney. I like,
actually, Ted Cruz and Donald
Trump. So, I'm
not necessarily in favor of one
over the other,
but I will say this.
And, by the way, I did support
Mitt Romney
when he ran for president. I
have been in
politics for 30 years. I think
what Mitt Romney
did, with all due respect,
Governor, today
was totally disgraceful.
I am so ashamed of him, as a
Republican, to
go after the Republican
front-runner, the
person who is very, very likely
to be the
Republican nominee, and
basically to say that
he's dishonest, that he's a
phony, to call
his voters, the millions and
millions of middle-class,
blue-collar workers who Donald
Trump has brought
into the party, which is one
thing I love
about Donald Trump as a
Republican -- he's
bringing all these people into
the party -- to
call them suckers, I just am
outraged by it.
And, by the way, I actually
think that this
-- that the American people and
a lot of the
Republican voters are outraged
by it, too.
And I actually think, Judy, that
this is going
to help Donald Trump, because it
makes the
point that he is representing
the kind of
middle-class, blue-collar voters
who haven't
seen a pay raise in 10 years,
and that, you
know, the establishment
Republicans are totally
against him and they will do
anything they
can to stop him.
And one last point, if I may,
Judy. You know,
a lot of -- I'm a conservative
Republican,
and I have kind of held my nose.
And I have,
you know, worked for Bob Dole to
win and Mitt
Romney, even though I had
serious disagreements
with them, because the
establishment always
said, you conservatives have to
get behind
the candidate.
Well, now the establishment, now
they don't
like the candidate and they're
saying they're
not going to get behind him.
And, Governor, I just think
that's -- that's
duplicitous.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Governor, what
about that?
Could what Governor Romney did
today backfire
in what he said about the people
who support
the -- what, a third or more of
the Republican
electorate who support Donald
Trump?
MICHAEL LEAVITT: I think there
will be people
who react that way, in the same
way that sometimes
we tell a brother or a sister or
a friend
who is involved in some sort of
emotional
thing that has them charged up,
and they're
about to make a big mistake,
say, I'm going
to do this because you said this
about it.
And I just think Mitt has made a
personal
statement. This is the way he
feels. This
is the way he believes. And he
simply didn't
feel, doesn't feel that he
wanted this to
go forward without having made
that statement.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But do you see
how voters could
take this as an insult, if you
will? And are
you worried Democrats will use
what he said
against Donald Trump in the fall
if Trump
is the nominee?
STEPHEN MOORE: That's what I'm
worried about.
MICHAEL LEAVITT: Well, the
Democrats have
a lot they can use if Mr. Trump
is in fact
the nominee.
Again, this is a personal
statement. He's
not the nominee and he's not
running to be
a candidate. He's not running
for president.
He is saying what he believes is
important
for the American people to know
about Donald
Trump and he is calling the
question.
He called the question on his
tax returns
and said, release them, so we
can see, and
if he doesn't, that's all the
proof that's
necessary. You might recall that
Governor
Romney went through this
himself. And I think
he concluded it was a mistake
for him not
to have done it sooner and in a
way that answered
the questions. He's saying the
same thing
to Donald Trump and has
questions that I think
many other people share.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stephen Moore,
you said a minute
ago you think this could end up
helping Donald
Trump, but what about the other
efforts out
there?
We hear that big donors in the
Republican
Party are trying to raise money
to help, whether
it's Marco Rubio, Ted Cruz? What
about those
efforts?
STEPHEN MOORE: Yes. Yes.
Well, they're out there. And
there's no -- I
mean, this is the Republican
establishment,
and the millionaires and
billionaires of the
party think that they can buy
this election.
And, you know, where I disagree
with -- and,
again, I disagree with Donald
Trump, Judy,
on a lot of things.
I disagree with him fervently on
immigration
and trade. I am a pro-free
trade, pro-immigration
Republican, just as the governor
is. But what
I object to is this idea that
we're not going
to let the voters speak.
And I think just that a lot of
the Republican
establishment is insulting --
you used that
word, and I think it was exactly
the right
word -- it's an insult to the
people who go
out to these things. I have been
to some of
these Donald Trump rallies,
Judy, and it is
amazing the people who turn out.
They are bikers and they're
carpenters and
they're soccer moms and they're
veterans and
people who care fervently about
this country.
I just am very reluctant. And I
hate to see
them dissed this way by the
Republican establishment.
I just think it's beneath the
party.
And, by the way, Donald Trump is
going to
be the nominee, and you're
right, Judy. These
insults are going to come back
and haunt our
nominee in November.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very quickly to
both of you,
could you each support Donald
Trump if he
ends up being the nominee of the
Republican
Party?
Governor Leavitt?
MICHAEL LEAVITT: I think we all
want a Republican
to win the presidency and think
it's deeply
important.
(CROSSTALK)
MICHAEL LEAVITT: ... deeply
important that,
in fact, it happens. And I think
that's why
Mitt Romney spoke as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And...
STEPHEN MOORE: I would
certainly, Judy, support
any of these Republicans over
Hillary Clinton.
And I will say this. If Donald
Trump is the
nominee, he is going to win 35
states. He
is going to win New York. He's
going to -- I
just disagree with the polls. I
think he brings
tens of millions of new voters
into the Republican
Party.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will leave it
there.
Stephen Moore...
(CROSSTALK)
MICHAEL LEAVITT: Governor Romney
also obviously
disagrees with Stephen.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right. We got
-- we did
get that sense today from his
news conference.
STEPHEN MOORE: I love the
governor, by the
way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stephen Moore,
Governor Michael
Leavitt, thank you both.
STEPHEN MOORE: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: With the outbreak
of the Zika
virus growing across the
Americas, scientists
are working on new ways to try
to stop its
spread by targeting the insects
that carry
the virus, mosquitoes.
One idea centers on altering
mosquitoes so
they will declare war on other
mosquitoes.
Science correspondent Miles
O'Brien has our
report. It's part of his series
of stories
that he's filed from Brazil on
Zika.
MILES O'BRIEN: The most deadly
animals on
Earth may have finally met their
match, and
the enemy is them. This is the
scene every
morning in Piracicaba, Brazil,
where the mosquito-borne
Zika virus is raging, along with
a long-running
outbreak of dengue fever.
Scientists hit the road,
releasing swarms
of genetically modified
mosquitoes that carry
a DNA time bomb. They are killer
mosquitoes.
KARLA TEPEDINO, Oxitec: We are
in a colony
room. This is where we want to
have females
happy, healthy, and things like
that.
MILES O'BRIEN: These mosquitoes
are created
by a British company called
Oxitec. Karla
Tepedino runs the supply line.
KARLA TEPEDINO: This is the
biggest mosquito
factory in the whole world. We
are producing
two million male mosquitoes per
week.
MILES O'BRIEN: You could say
it's in-gene-ious.
Oxitec technicians insert a
synthetic gene
into mosquito eggs that causes
them to create
too many proteins. It's a fatal
disease.
While they are still in the lab,
they're given
an antidote that keeps the
disease at bay.
Once they are released, they
find a female
and breed. But their offspring
inherit the
gene that causes the fatal
disease. With no
antidotes in the wild, they die
not long after
they are hatched, before they
can breed.
KARLA TEPEDINO: The beauty of
this technique
is that it can reach the
mosquitoes where
no other technique can find it.
We are using
mosquitoes to fight themselves.
MILES O'BRIEN: It appears to be
working. And
here's how they know. In
addition to the killer
gene, they add one that's a
special marker.
Only the genetically modified
mosquitoes will
glow under a special light. This
way, they
can track the mosquito
population. They say
90 percent of the insects in
this area now
carry the fatal flaw.
KARLA TEPEDINO: As the health
secretary of
Piracicaba has stated last year
they had 133
cases of dengue, this year, only
one in the
area that we are treating.
MILES O'BRIEN: Mosquitoes
killing mosquitoes.
It may sound too good to be
true, and despite
more than a decade of work, it
remains unclear
if this can have lasting impact
on a bigger
scale. It's a high-tech twist in
the long,
difficult war to stop the spread
of diseases
carried by the mosquito species
called Aedes
aegypti.
We have been battling the same
enemy for generations.
NARRATOR: Notice the
white-tipped palps, the
triangular white spots on the
abdomen, the
white leg bands, and the white
flyer shaped
design on the thorax. These are
characteristic
of the adult aegypti mosquito.
MILES O'BRIEN: Aegypti is blamed
for spreading
Zika virus, as well as dengue,
West Nile and
yellow fever. Combined, the
diseases infect
hundreds of millions of people a
year, causing
a host of maladies and birth
defects, killing
several million.
But with Zika, there is growing
concern here
that other species are guilty as
well. In
this government lab in Recife,
Brazil, they
are working to develop a test
that can tell
if a mosquito is carrying Zika
virus.
Right now, no one knows for
certain how common
it is, or in which species.
Marcelo Paiva is a molecular
entomologist.
You know, when compare this
against dengue
or yellow fever, any number of
other viruses
borne by mosquitoes, we don't
know so much
about Zika, do we?
MARCELO PAIVA, Molecular
Entomologist: We
have no idea, actually.
MILES O'BRIEN: Really? Tell me.
MARCELO PAIVA: This is totally
new.
MILES O'BRIEN: It's kind of --
well, it's
virgin science.
MARCELO PAIVA: It is, yes. We
were in a dark
field, now -- no light at end of
tunnel. Now
we're trying to clarify things.
MILES O'BRIEN: As they try to
solve this complex
puzzle, his boss, entomologist
Constancia
Ayres, is trying to prove a
theory that would
have huge, global implications,
that another
mosquito species called Culex
quinquefasciatus
could also be a so-called vector
for Zika.
Culex is 20 times more abundant
here in Brazil,
and is also much more common
than Aedis aegypti
in North America and Europe.
CONSTANCIA AYRES, Entomologist:
In Micronesia,
when we had the first outbreak
of the Zika
in 2007, there is no Aedes
aegypti there.
So, probably, another vector was
transmitting
the disease. And Culex also
transmitted other
arbovirus, such as West Nile
virus, Japanese
encephalitis, so why not Zika?
MILES O'BRIEN: The two breeds
behave very
differently. Culex bites at
night, while aegypti
prefers the day. Culex breeds in
dirty water.
Aegypti likes her water clean.
This would
dramatically up the ante for
traditional mosquito
control techniques.
CONSTANCIA AYRES: So, if both
species are
involved, you will have to use
repellent 24
hours a day, basically.
MILES O'BRIEN: Wow. Yes. So
you're going deet
all the time.
CONSTANCIA AYRES: Yes, all the
time.
MILES O'BRIEN: That's not good.
That's an
important, a significant thing.
It's a 24-hour
fight.
They are infecting Culex
mosquitoes with Zika
in the lab, then dissecting them
to see how
they carry and transmit the
virus. The jury
is still out on what happens in
the real world.
It could mean there will be
demand for another
breed of weaponized mosquito.
This not a new battle here in
Brazil. As a
matter of fact, it's actually a
long war.
And they have had some success
over the years.
In the mid-'50s and the
mid-'70s, they very
nearly eradicated these
mosquitoes using pesticides,
many of them DDT.
But even before DDT was banned,
though, the
mosquitoes developed a
resistance to it. So,
today, with the population of
humans and mosquitoes
so much greater than ever, there
really is
no realistic way to think about
eradication.
But scientists all over the
world are not
ready to surrender. Leslie
Vosshall is a professor
of neurogenetics at the
Rockefeller University
in New York.
LESLIE VOSSHALL, Rockefeller
University: So
we're trying to figure out why
some people
are more attractive than others.
The diseases
start with a mosquito. The
mosquito needs
to find someone to bite. The
more attractive
people are bitten more. We want
to understand
why that is.
MILES O'BRIEN: She and her team
performed
what they all the mosquito
magnet study. Open
the gate, and down the chute
they go. Turns
out mosquitoes love some of us
more than others.
So what is the differentiator?
LESLIE VOSSHALL: So, mosquitoes,
especially
the mosquitoes that are
spreading Zika, dengue,
chikungunya, they love humans
over any other
animal. So they're cuing into
our body odor,
the carbon dioxide in our
breath, our body
heat. So, it's the body odor
that I think
is what distinguishes us from
other non-human
animals.
MILES O'BRIEN: Vosshall and her
team are creating
designer mosquitoes. It's
genetic engineering,
but a different version from
Oxitec's self-destructing
insects.
Here, they create unique
attributes, for example,
a bug that can't detect certain
odors, to
try and understand what they are
hunting.
LESLIE VOSSHALL: Obviously, if
we figure out
what makes a mosquito magnet
attractive, then
we have understood a big part of
what mosquitoes
are hunting. Then we can
interrupt their hunting
behavior.
MILES O'BRIEN: In the meantime,
all we really
have are nets and deet.
Researchers aren't
even sure how the chemical
thwarts mosquitoes.
Can't science do better?
LESLIE VOSSHALL: Ultimately, how
cool would
it be to have like a cream that
you put on
your arm that has a probiotic,
right, that
makes you demagnetized as a
mosquito magnet?
MILES O'BRIEN: But, for now,
there is little
to stop the global health havoc
caused by
mosquitoes. Zika and birth
defects are just
part of the devastation. The
most deadly animal
on Earth is an easy foe to
underestimate and
it marches on with impunity.
Miles O'Brien, the "PBS
NewsHour," Recife,
Brazil.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Making Sense
of sexism on Wall Street; "On My
Own," public
radio host Diane Rehm's memoir
of love and
loss; and a soft-spoken musician
unleashes
her inner beast.
But first: A new study provides
a disturbing
look into the ways ISIS uses
children to fight
its battles.
Hari Sreenivasan has our
conversation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: A new report
published by
the Combating Terrorism Center
at West Point
chronicles the increasing use of
children
as fighters for the so-called
Islamic State.
The report's authors, based at
Georgia State
University in Atlanta,
documented the Islamic
State's own propaganda, which
praises deceased
young fighters as martyrs. It
shows how the
group uses children and youth in
suicide operations.
They found three times as many
suicide attacks
involving young people in
January of this
year than last year.
For more on the study's findings
and what
they mean, we're joined by one
of the report's
authors, professor Mia Bloom.
Problem Bloom, unfortunately,
child soldiers
aren't anything new. So, how is
ISIS using
them differently?
MIA BLOOM, Georgia State
University: So, we
started our study with a
baseline looking
at the literature on child
soldiers, looking
at biographies and
autobiographies of people
who had been child soldiers, in
order to get
a sense of what we thought we
might expect.
And so we expected that children
would be
used when they ran out of adults
or when they
couldn't find adults, or that
children would
be used against civilian
targets. And we didn't
find either of those. Instead,
what we found
was that children in ISIS are
used alongside
the adults, not instead, and, in
fact, only
3 percent of the time were
children used against
civilian targets; 61 percent of
the time,
they were going after what we
would call hard
targets, military, police,
militias and the
army.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So they're
doing just what
the grownups do.
MIA BLOOM: They're doing exactly
what the
grownups do, and, in fact, we
found considerably
more suicide bombers than anyone
expected.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And you said
-- you actually
break it down; 39 percent are
driving basically
car bombs?
MIA BLOOM: Thirty-nine percent
were car bombs.
These were vehicle-borne
improvised explosive
device, so it's a VBIED.
But many of the children were
also wearing
what we would call a suicide
belt, which is
an individual IED that is
attached to them,
so they were part of these
marauding raids,
these inghimasi, so they would
go into the
target, shoot and then blow up
the IED or
the suicide belt at the end of
the operation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, it used
to be that
groups would recruit in secret,
that they
knew that there was going to be
societal backlash.
This is the opposite.
You're saying in your report
that ISIS brags
about the fact that they're
recruiting young
kids.
MIA BLOOM: Not only is ISIS
boasting that
they're using these children,
but they're
using the children also in a way
to humiliate
the men.
What we didn't put into report,
but will be
exploring further, is that ISIS
is using the
children, for example, in the
prison to determines
who lives and dies. They're also
using the
children to actually carry out
the execution,
and so they're empowering the
children, and
by doing so, disempowering the
men.
And this is a way in which they
are recruiting
the children to basically feel
like you will
be more than what you are. You
won't be a
child in a society where you're
lesser than,
but you will be powerful, you
will be a cub
and then eventually a lion.
HARI SREENIVASAN: As you watched
through all
of these images and videos, you
actually point
out that almost half these
children have smiles
on their faces, at least in the
propaganda
that comes out after. Explain
that.
MIA BLOOM: Well, one of the
things that we
tried to do is, we're trying to
get a sense
of, is there any coercion? Are
the children
there voluntarily?
So, for example, again, using
the baseline
of child soldiers, the
stereotypical story
that we know from Liberia or
Uganda is that
these children are coerced and
they're drugged,
and so they're made to
perpetrate an act of
horrific violence against
members of their
own family, so that they can
never go back
to their village.
We didn't find that with ISIS.
We found parents
who willingly gave the
terrorists access to
their children. They encouraged
the children.
One of the images, for example,
we even see
the father saying goodbye to his
son.
But we also saw a lot of images
where the
kids are smiling and they look
like they are
very excited about this future.
They even
put them in a setting that looks
like the
Garden of Eden, in order to
convey that that's
where they're headed; they're
going to paradise.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And what kind
of age range
are we talking about? Obviously,
under 18
qualifies as a child, but how
young were some
of these kids?
MIA BLOOM: So, we used age
categories based
on developmental psychology.
Some of the kids were as young
as 8. So, we
had again -- an age range of
8-12, 13-15,
16-18, and we didn't go above
18. And anyone
we knew that might be over 18,
we didn't include
in the study.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, so
we have this
information. How should this
inform our policy-making
or our strategy to combat this?
MIA BLOOM: I mean, part of it is
that we have
seen in other instances
terrorist groups using
very young children. So,
although they didn't
brag about it, we did some field
research
in Pakistan, where the Pakistani
Taliban has
forcibly recruited very young
kids to be suicide
bombers.
We know that there are ways of
de-radicalizing
and deprogramming these
children, but it's
very involved, it's very
expensive. It requires
a multipronged approach. So part
of it is,
what do we do when soldiers are
facing children?
We know that there are increased
levels of
PTSD. But we also have to figure
out ways
not just of preventing the
children from entering
in the first place, but what do
we do with
them once we find them?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally, while
several of
these children were from Iraq
and Syria, you
point out that some of these
children came
from other countries far
overseas as well.
So, how did they get there? We
can understand
that a 22-year-old figures out a
way to get
on a bus, on a plane. How did
these small
kids from, say, Europe, get in?
MIA BLOOM: Well, what's the
really horrific
part of the study is we
discovered how many
parents are bringing their
children with them.
So, among the foreign fighters
that are coming
from the United Kingdom and
France, Belgium,
Tunisia, Egypt, they're bringing
their entire
families with them when they go.
And they're
basically giving the terrorists
access to
these children when they get
there.
So, we are seeing parents who
are basically
colluding with the terrorists
and allowing
their children to die at a very
early age.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, Mia
Bloom, thanks
so much.
MIA BLOOM: Thank you so much for
having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In recent years,
there's been
more attention on discrimination
in places
like Silicon Valley and
Hollywood.
But there's been less attention
of late to
the continuing problem of
harassment and outright
sexism in some firms on Wall
Street and the
financial industry. Companies
long have engaged
in training workers about
appropriate behavior,
but lawsuits are still being
filed against
firms alleging bias and a
culture of harassment.
A new book casts a harsh
spotlight on the
way women have been treated over
time.
Our economics correspondent,
Paul Solman,
has the story. It's part of his
weekly series,
Making Sense, which airs every
Thursday on
the "NewsHour."
ACTOR: Stock's going to Pluto,
man.
ACTOR: Start unloading.
ACTOR: What? Sell?
ACTOR: Dump it now. Dump it all.
PAUL SOLMAN: Trading floors, for
years, the
cliche has been a menagerie of
men. And even
today, only about 15 percent of
traders are
female. So, what's it like for a
woman?
MAUREEN SHERRY, Author, "Opening
Belle": One
woman I know used to work with a
managing
director. If women were walking
by in a skirt,
he would throw himself on the
floor, pretend
to look up their skirt. And they
would -- he
would get the laugh, you know,
from the other
guys.
PAUL SOLMAN: Former Bear Stearns
managing
director Maureen Sherry had her
own trying
walk when she worked on Wall
Street.
MAUREEN SHERRY: When I had come
back from
my maternity leave, I was still
nursing, and
kept a breast pump under my
desk. One trader
would notice, and he would start
making a
mooing sound, and, you know,
sometimes other
herd members would join in.
PAUL SOLMAN: Actually mooing?
MAUREEN SHERRY: Yes, mooing.
And one night, I was leaving.
And someone
came to tell me that there had
been a bet
that a young guy wouldn't do a
shot of my
breast milk, and that he had
risen to the
challenge.
ACTORS: Do hereby pledge
allegiance to the
frat.
PAUL SOLMAN: Frat-boy antics and
overt sexism
are vivid features of Sherry's
new novel,
"Opening Belle," based on her
experiences
on a trading floor in the 1990s,
and those
of others still in the business.
MAUREEN SHERRY: On the floor I
worked on,
we had some ex-professional
athletes.
PAUL SOLMAN: You had
ex-professional...
MAUREEN SHERRY: Many --
professional athletes,
New York Ranger. We had a Knick.
We had people
who really, really lived that
team mentality.
PAUL SOLMAN: And the competitive
edge?
MAUREEN SHERRY: Very
competitive. Loved to
win, yes.
PAUL SOLMAN: Loved to win. Loved
to compete,
loved to win, loved to risk.
MAUREEN SHERRY: There's no
walls, and they're
all together, and there's the --
the cortisol
high of doing trades together
every single
day, lots of testosterone.
And so you can see where risk
becomes part
of the language.
PAUL SOLMAN: And the more risk
you take, the
greater the high?
MAUREEN SHERRY: I think that's a
proven fact.
PAUL SOLMAN: Indeed, it is.
Harvard behavioral economist
Iris Bohnet has
studied the research.
IRIS BOHNET, Harvard Business
School: After
having experienced the wins, in
particular
in, men testosterone tends to
spike. And that
makes men even more willing to
take risks.
That has been coined the
winner's effect,
meaning that, when we experience
a win, that
affects how we perceive risks
going forward,
and become even more
risk-loving.
Interestingly enough, a number
of papers now
have been written which couldn't
find a winner's
effect for women.
PAUL SOLMAN: And that might help
explain why
women on Wall Street are paid
just 68 cents
to a man's dollar, and so few
make it to or
near the top. The males in
charge value the
winner's effect, even though it
exaggerates
losses too.
IRIS BOHNET: Research does
suggest that diverse
teams do outperform homogeneous
teams.
PAUL SOLMAN: And yet, says
Sherry, women are
discriminated against in lots of
ways.
MAUREEN SHERRY: Accounts not
being given equitably,
that's really one way, or an
account being
taken away when you felt it
wasn't something
that you deserved. You have to
understand
that these men make a really
good living,
and chances are very high that,
if they have
children, their wife is probably
staying home
with their children.
It is just sort of understood
that, at a certain
point, you're going to just
leave to be with
your family.
PAUL SOLMAN: It's not just on
Wall Street,
says Professor Bohnet.
IRIS BOHNET: We do know that
bias creeps in
whenever we take potential into
account. We
don't naturally expect women to
want to climb
up the career leader.
LEONARDO DICAPRIO, Actor:
Everybody had a
good week?
PAUL SOLMAN: And if you don't
think women
are likely to climb, then it's a
lot easier
to treat them less
professionally.
LEONARDO DICAPRIO: I have
offered our lovely
sales assistant Danielle
Harrison here $10,000
to shave her (EXPLETIVE DELETED)
head!
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
PAUL SOLMAN: Maureen Sherry knew
a female
banker who approached a male
trader about
a promotion.
MAUREEN SHERRY: She was really
vivacious and
beautiful, and she went over and
she talked
to him about it, and he said,
yes, let's -- we
need to sit down, have a proper
interview,
et cetera.
And he said, let's meet at this
bar. And she
gets there, and she sat down at
the table,
and she said, when she put it
down and started
her prepared interview, he said,
that's what
this is about? And he threw a
hotel room key
on the -- on the table, and
said, you know,
I thought that's why you wanted
to meet, or
something like -- to that
effect.
PAUL SOLMAN: No shock that, in
the last decade,
several major financial firms
have settled
large gender discrimination
cases, while smaller
suits, usually handled in-house
and kept hush-hush,
abound.
MAUREEN SHERRY: One of the
people I have spoken
with is a lawyer. I said, how
many cases in
this genre do you have a year?
And he said,
my firm? About 80.
PAUL SOLMAN: Eighty?
MAUREEN SHERRY: Eight-zero, one
firm.
PAUL SOLMAN: For years, Sherry
herself found
Wall Street gratifying,
atmosphere notwithstanding.
But she left in 2000, when she
realized she'd
gone about as far as she could
go.
MAUREEN SHERRY: Look, when you
feel that your
career's been determined for you
and you're
not progressing any further,
it's incredibly
ungratifying.
PAUL SOLMAN: In other words, you
hit the glass
ceiling.
MAUREEN SHERRY: Yes.
PAUL SOLMAN: Her husband
remained in finance,
but Sherry became a writer. Her
first book,
a children's mystery, was
inspired by her
New York apartment, where clues
to solve an
elaborate scavenger hunt are
hidden in the
walls.
MAUREEN SHERRY: Here, go ahead.
Take that
picture. Do you know what this
is, by the
way?
PAUL SOLMAN: That's Dr. Seuss.
MAUREEN SHERRY: Dr. Seuss.
PAUL SOLMAN: And that's
Sylvester McMonkey
McBean. Sneetches. Those are
Sneetches.
(LAUGHTER)
MAUREEN SHERRY: You're right.
Behind each one is a replica of
a room in
the apartment. They fit
together, and behind
every single one of these, you
could build
out a whole house.
PAUL SOLMAN: The mother of four
had ample
distractions, but Sherry kept
dwelling on
her more than a decade on Wall
Street.
MAUREEN SHERRY: If you can't get
the story
out of your head, and can't let
it go, you
have to put it to paper.
PAUL SOLMAN: And that's what it
was for you?
You couldn't let it go?
MAUREEN SHERRY: I couldn't let
it go. I tried.
It still bothered me. I just
wanted to sort
of discuss, to let you see
through the lens
of a woman what it's like to
work in a place
like that, what it feels like.
PAUL SOLMAN: What it felt like
from 1989 to
the year 2000, and apparently
what it still
feels a lot like today.
"PBS NewsHour" economics
correspondent Paul
Solman, reporting from New York.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now a different
kind of read.
A new memoir captures the grief
of losing
a spouse and reassessing one's
path.
Jeffrey Brown has this latest
addition to
the "NewsHour" Bookshelf.
JEFFREY BROWN: For more than 35
years, radio
host Diane Rehm has tackled
pretty much every
topic under the sun.
DIANE REHM, Author, "On My Own":
Already,
hundreds of Syrians have been
killed.
JEFFREY BROWN: Her two-hour
daily public radio
program produced by WMAU in
Washington, D.C.,
reaches some 2.5 million
listeners nationwide.
Now in a new book titled "On My
Own," she's
addressing a more personal an
raw topic, the
death of her husband John after
54 years of
marriage. John was dying owed
with Parkinson's
disease in 2005 and moved into
an assisted
living facility in 2012.
Two years later, in steady
decline, he decided
to end his life. But with
doctors legally
barred from assisting, his only
option was
to refuse food, liquids and
medication. His
death came 10 days later. Diane
Rehm lives
alone now with her dog Maxie and
with lingering
grief and anger over her
husband's last days.
DIANE REHM: I so resented that
John was having
to go through this long 10-day
process to
die. He had said 10 days earlier
he was ready
to die, and it took him that
long. It shouldn't
have, I don't believe, taken him
that long.
JEFFREY BROWN: You write: "I
rage at a system
that wouldn't allow John to be
helped toward
his own death."
He knew what he was going
through. You two
had talked this through, and he
just wanted
to let it happen.
DIANE REHM: He wanted to
relinquish life.
He didn't commit suicide. He
wanted to let
go of life and be on to the next
journey.
JEFFREY BROWN: You and he had
talked a lot
about these kind of end-of-life
matters. Right?
DIANE REHM: Absolutely.
JEFFREY BROWN: That is one of
the things that
comes through in the book, is
that that helped
you in some degree. Right? Even
as hard as
it was, you had talked it
through.
DIANE REHM: Even after he said,
I'm ready,
I'm ready to die, I said to him,
sweetheart,
are you sure? Is this really
what you want?
And he said, absolutely. I can
no longer use
my hands. I cannot walk. I
cannot feed myself.
I cannot do anything for myself.
I am ready
to die.
JEFFREY BROWN: One of the things
I'm sure
will resonate with a lot of
people, you refer
to is the capital-G guilt that
you felt along
the way, right, as you were
moving toward
this point.
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: ... the guilt?
DIANE REHM: Of course, of
course.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
DIANE REHM: How could I not feel
guilt? I
think every spouse who sees
another go into
an assisted living facility must
experience
some of that.
If I had stayed home, if I had
given up my
work, if I had cared for him
here at home,
perhaps he would have lived at
least a few
months longer. I'm not sure that
is the case.
But it was the guilt I felt. We
take vows
when we marry, for better, for
worse, in sickness,
in health.
JEFFREY BROWN: Fifty-four-year
marriage, right,
which you write about very
honestly. You write
about periods of joy and of
partnership, certainly,
but also, as you say, years of
hostility,
endless periods of silence. Why
did you write
about that?
DIANE REHM: Because I believe
that no marriage
is perfect.
And yet so many of us go into
marriage or
partnership or relationship
believing that
all is going to be sunny, all is
going to
be wonderful. I wish, Jeff, I
had been more
mature, because John needed more
distance
than I did. John needed more
quiet time than
I did. I love to be with people.
John's greatest
solace was being alone.
JEFFREY BROWN: And, in the end,
in his last
days, was there a kind of
understanding?
DIANE REHM: Totally.
I mean, there was such closeness
in those
last three weeks, four weeks
before he died.
JEFFREY BROWN: You know, out of
this experience,
you have become a much more
active advocate,
I guess, right, for the right to
die. That
sets you in the middle of a very
passionate
debate in this country.
DIANE REHM: I appreciate both
sides.
I am arguing not that everyone
should feel
as I do and ask for death when
the time comes.
I understand those who would
prefer to give
and receive palliative care.
Total individual
choice. But do not let the law
prevent me
from making my choice about my
own life.
JEFFREY BROWN: Becoming so
public about it
also brought you some questions
and criticism
from your organization, right?
DIANE REHM: Exactly.
JEFFREY BROWN: Whether you are
now an advocate
or your more traditional role as
a journalist,
right?
DIANE REHM: Once I leave the
microphone, then
I will become, as you say, an
advocate. Right
now, I am advocating for myself.
I am not
advocating for any organization
in particular
or any change in any state law
in particular.
I am advocating for myself.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, you're now,
as the book
says, on your own...
DIANE REHM: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: ... for the first
time in many,
many, many years, right?
DIANE REHM: Yes, all my life.
JEFFREY BROWN: Except for Maxie.
DIANE REHM: Except for Maxie,
who is my constant
companion.
I talk to Maxie. I talk to John,
and John
talks back to me.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes. That
conversation hasn't
stopped, huh?
DIANE REHM: It hasn't stopped. I
don't think
it will stop. And it really
helps me.
JEFFREY BROWN: You have also
announced that
you will stop doing your radio
program at
the end of this year.
DIANE REHM: At the end of the
year.
JEFFREY BROWN: I wonder if --
are the two
related?
DIANE REHM: I had decided that,
since I am
currently 79 -- I will be 80 in
September
-- that 80 was a good point to
step away from
the microphone I have held daily
for 37 years.
It seems to me that there ought
to be other,
fresher voices, newer ideas,
newer plans for
a national program like mine.
And I think
I would welcome that change.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right. The
book is "On
My Own."
Diane Rehm, thanks so much for
letting us
come.
DIANE REHM: Jeff, thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next, another
installment of
our weekly series Brief But
Spectacular.
Today, unleashing your inner
beast from singer-songwriter
Thao Nguyen of the group Thao
and the Get
Down Stay Down.
Her latest album, "A Man Alive,"
will be released
tomorrow. And she will be
touring cross-country
starting this month.
THAO NGUYEN, Musician: I taught
myself how
to do this when I was riding the
bus to school.
Push it.
I did teach myself the guitar
and various
other string instruments. It's a
technique
called fake it until you make
it. I could
give a seminar, really. You
know, my interest
in a live -- in putting on a
live show is
connecting with people there.
I'm a pretty reserved person in
my real life,
in my non-working life, but
then, when I get
on stage, it's an opportunity to
tap into
this beast? It's the most
present I will ever
be in my life. We want people to
know that
when they come to the show, they
can come
with us. We can go somewhere
together.
To be an Asian-American woman,
there's that
kind of meekness and timidness
and submission
that is expected of you. I know
that I embody
probably the least threatening
physical form
you could. That's true. That's
real. That's
-- you know, I'm like -- I'm
tiny. I understand.
I have such love for the
audience, but, also,
I'm like, I will eat you. I want
people to
see how little I care about
showing that side.
When I was growing up, I didn't
really have
freedom of expression. And there
was no one
entirely interested in what I
was saying or
thinking.
The point is that you're fed and
that you
have shelter and do well in
school. But it
wasn't until I got on stage
where I realized,
it just sort of -- I could tap
into without
even wanting to. It just sort of
overtook
me.
Now I can tame the beast a
little bit, enough
so that I can only do it for
work. To be that
open and vulnerable and to have
crazy eyes
and to be sometimes snarling or
just screaming,
it's important for me to share
that part,
you know, because, you know, I
think it's
healthy for the both of us.
I'm Thao Nguyen, and this is my
Brief But
Spectacular take on the beast
within.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can watch
other episodes
of our Brief But Spectacular
series on our
Facebook page,
Facebook.com/NewsHour.
On the "NewsHour" online: a new
study of the
genes behind our hair could help
explain why
it turns gray, thins or grows
between our
eyebrows. Geneticists at
University College
London identified genes that, in
theory, could
help researchers develop ways to
stop unwanted
growth and for some to promote
hair growth
where it's needed.
You can read what else they
found on our home
page. All that and more is on
our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour. It's all
there.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening with Mark Shields and
David Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.